This
is true. That happens very regularly. It does with
anthropologists, too. When you're working with
informants, you get a guy who's just great, you
know, and spouting stuff this way and the other
way, and you switch on the tape recorder, and all of
a sudden you begin to get these awful stills Which I
will shortly demonstrate. I know you, from your
letters, which you might want to forget, but I know
you were in Cincinnati for a while, perhaps grew up
there, but if you'd just briefly run down your
early history until, say, you got up to UT, it would
help out a good deal, I think. Well, first of all,
maybe I ought to say this, that I don't really want
to forget those letters. they they're kind of
embarrassing to go back and read now but after all
you know you you can't be held responsible for
everything you said when you were 14 years old but
they meant a great deal to me at one period in my life
because i was a kid i was i was nuts about sports and
things of that kind i was very active up until i got
rheumatic fever when i was a child And I was very
sick, and I was sick for a long time. And all I had
were books. I used to lie up in my bed in a second
story house and look out the window and see all
these kids going down to play ball and everything.
And I couldn't go with them. All I had were the books
and the magazines and these letters that I wrote.
And I can remember just the desperate anxiety of
waiting for that magazine to come out and find out,
had your letter appeared in print? And it just made
my day. And I really think it would be pretty
ungrateful to go back now and say, well, it's just a
mistake of my youth and all that. Because silly as
they were, they were in court. Well, this isn't
answering the question. I never answered
questions. Let's see.
You were in Cincinnati when you started writing
letters. Well, I was born. Maybe we can begin
there.
I was born in Cincinnati on the 30th of March in
1928.
My father was a doctor, a surgeon. My mother had
been a nurse. She met my father when she was a nurse,
he was a doctor, and the full process of time I
appeared.
I was still living in Cincinnati at the time I first
discovered science fiction. Actually, I had
discovered it, if that's the word, and read it long
before I knew what it was. I read Jules Verne, I can
remember, along about the fourth grade,
something of that sort, and thought it was great.
And then I hit H.G. Wells. Actually, the way I got to
reading science fiction, per se, was I was at
Burroughs, and I'd read everything that Edgar
Rice Burroughs ever wrote, I think. I
particularly was knocked out by the Martian
stories. I guess everybody would. I often
thought, you know, I think everybody did the same
thing. You know, you read A Princess of Mars, and
that wonderful technique by which he gets to Mars.
You know, he just goes out and looks yearningly up
there at the red planet, and there he is. I'm sure
every kid that ever read Burroughs tried that.
I've often thought how, what an utter disaster it
would have been if it worked. You know, and you
suddenly woke up, you know, weak, pimply,
13-year-old boy, you know, standing there on
Mars, you know, surrounded by all these God-awful
things. But anyway, I read a lot of Burroughs, and
got a letter from him one time, by the way. He was
kind enough to answer a letter that I wrote. And I
went to a newsstand one time. I don't know how much
tape you got on this thing. Oh, I've got plenty.
You've got plenty. I'm going to flip it here in a
minute. Well, let me just back up a little bit. I was
always an omnivorous reader. And chiefly in those
days, what I was reading, aside from every book I
could get my hands on, were pulp magazines. And I
read them all. Well, not all of them, but most of
them. And I subscribed to G8 and his Battle Aces and
Daredevil Aces and The Spider and The Shadow and
Doc Savage and all this stuff. My pet was G8. And,
you know, looking back now, I can see why. Because
if you've ever read, you've never read G8 and his
Battle Aces by Robert J. Hogan. Well, they were
terrific. They had a wild Baroque. imagination to
them, and they're really science fiction
stories, but they weren't presented that way.
Anyway, one time I went to the newsstand and I saw
one of those big fat old Amazings, and I don't
remember the date.
Well, I don't remember what it was, but it had a
Burroughs story in it that was listed on the cover,
and I picked it up to read the Burroughs story, and
then I made the fatal mistake of reading the rest of
the magazine. And I remember in that issue they had
a Neander Bender story in it. Adam Link Saves the
World, I think was the title of it. And a great short
novel by Edmund Hamilton called Treasure on
Thunder Moon, which I thought at the time was
doubtless the finest piece of literature I'd ever
read. Anyway, I was just completely hooked. And
that's how it happened. I really did the kind of
junk that I described in the letter. you know,
hopping on the bicycle and barreling back to the
newsstand and buying everything that had
anything to do with science fiction. It really
happened. It happened every month.
So, anyway, there I was in Cincinnati, and the way I
got out of Cincinnati was during the war, as I said,
my father was a doctor, and he enlisted, and they
sent him to Crystal City, Texas. as medical
officer in charge of what they called an alien
detention camp. There was an internment camp for
Japanese and Germans. And needless to say, he took
the family with me, with him. And when I got to
Crystal City, I was a sophomore in high school. It
was the end of my sophomore year in high school. And
so that gets me out of Cincinnati and into Texas.
Now where do you want me to go from there? You ended
up in Kerrville, then. I stayed with my family in
Crystal City through my junior year in high
school. That must have been 44, that sounds right.
Then my father was transferred to Galveston to the
Marine Hospital, and I stayed in Crystal City
after the family left and rented a room there and
stayed, because every time I moved I got
ineligible to play football. And football was the
big thing in my life. I wasn't about to miss my
senior year, so I stayed there another year. Then
after I graduated in August 45, I came to the
university, but my family was living in
Galveston. And then we left Galveston, my family
left Galveston. Oh boy. long about my junior year
in college. Sorry, I don't know what date that
would be. As I say, I'm miserable on dates. I went to
Kerrville. Daddy went to work for the Veterans
Hospital in Kerrville, you know, the
tuberculosis hospital. And so that's how I got to
Kerrville. My mother's still there. My father's
dead. And I guess that about covers it as far as
formal places to live. picked up at UT as a freshman
when you started your college at Gibbs. Yeah, I
went through Plan 2 here at the university and got
my BA in Plan 2. My English professor my freshman
year was Harry Ranson, which shows how old I am, and
a marvelous teacher, by the way. And I think, if I'm
not mistaken, I was the only The only boy in the
graduating class from Crystal City High School
that went to the University of Texas. Everybody
else went to A&M. So I was the maverick in the group.
And I got my BA here in Plan 2, which, as you may know,
doesn't have a major. And I got my MA here with a
major in English and a minor in anthropology. I
wrote my MA thesis on science fiction. Then I went
to UCLA and took my PhD in anthropology. Did you
start out as an anthropology major on the master's
level? There were mentions, I think, in the
letters that you were shooting in that direction.
No, not really. The way it worked was that I'd
really, I'd always been interested in
anthropology. I got interested in it from science
fiction, and as you probably know, a great deal of
science fiction deals with what really is a
conflict between cultures of one sort or another,
even, you know, so you set it on Saturn, it's still
the same deal. So, and I was always interested in
that. When I got to university, my freshman year, I
took a couple of courses in anthropology, and I,
uh, I liked it, you know, liked it a lot, but I wasn't
really hooked or anything, and I didn't take any
more anthropology until my senior year, and a
number of people had told me that There was a
professor on the campus that I really ought to take
a course from before I left the university. This
was McAllister. And I did. I took it really to take
McAllister, not to take anthropology. And he was
just one of these fabulous teachers, you know. And
really, from that time on, I was in anthropology.
But I was so committed for a variety of reasons, one
reason I had so many hours, to English, that I went
ahead and took my MA in English at the same time I was
taking graduate work in anthropology. And I
actually taught English here for a while at
Ransoms and Systems. But I knew that wasn't what I
wanted to do. I found myself in my English classes
talking about Cheyenne and Comanche and . So I went
to UCLA and took the PhD. You had a pretty good
variety of jobs while you were a student here,
didn't you? No, not really. Didn't you have a radio
program for a while? Yeah, but that was later. If my
chronology isn't hopelessly off, it was after
1955 when I came back here to teach anthropology. I
hadn't finished my PhD, but I had everything but
the dissertation. And it was sometime after that
that I got roped into doing that disc jockey show on
KHFI. And we did it for a couple of years, as I
recall, right up until the time, I think, that I
left to go back to the University of California at
Riverside to teach for a year. But apart from that,
there really wasn't much of anything. Did you ever
work for the American Statesman? No. Just
thinking from the reporter. No, I've written a
couple of articles for them from time to time, but I
never worked for them. And really, as far as actual
jobs are concerned, there's been almost nothing.
There was a period in Cincinnati, actually, where
I worked for a record store, but not a long time ago.
That's pretty well covered that aspect of it.
Yeah, not that there's much to cover. This type of
article, I don't need much depth. Or if I find I need
it, I'll have to look back at you by letter. Okay.
You started publishing when you were an
undergraduate student here? Is that right? That
sounds about right. I know one of the letters is
from your roommate at the time. Really?
Commenting on a published story of yours. He
commented, It's a great story now, this. It's
immaterial of Chaz behind me with a gun. Isn't that
funny? I have no memory of that at all. Who was it? Do
you remember Tom Toney? I don't remember the name.
So it must have been. So apparently you must have
started when you... Well, actually, I started
long before that. That is, started writing. It
started before I ever left Cincinnati. And I
conned my folks into buying me a used Remington.
And I taught myself to type. This is when I was so
practically bedridden. And I ground out all sorts
of masterpieces and sent them in to a variety of
editors. And I'll never forget how kind most of
them were. You know, considering the quality of
what I was doubtless sending them, they must have
been pretty terrible. And almost from the very
beginning, I must have been about 14 when I began
doing this, I hardly ever got just a form of
rejection slip. They'd always write me letters
and say, this shows a lot of promise. Keep trying.
Do this, that, or the other. And
it's something that meant a great deal to me. And I
kept it up. All the time I was in Crystal City.
Despite my addiction to football and one thing and
another, I wrote all the time. Not prodigiously,
but I was always writing something. And so when I
finally did connect, it wasn't a deal where I just
sat down one day and wrote a story and somebody
bought it. Tony Boucher, actually. But just that I
had been writing ever since I was about 14 years
old. And to come back to your question, you know, I
guess I must have been, I'm certain I was, because I
know it was after we moved to Kerrville that I sold
that first story, and I'll never forget it. It was a
story you probably are familiar with since you've
researched me so thoroughly. The Boy Next Door
actually was a story that I wrote for Weird Tales
and sent it to Weird Tales, and this was, you know,
toward the end of Weird Tales' existence, when
they were not exactly doing what you'd call
creative editing. And I never got any response
from them at all, just the manuscript back in the
mail. The magazine of fantasy and science fiction
had just started up, and I'd read it and thought,
boy, this is terrific. Here's a guy that will
probably appreciate my tremendous genius. And he
did. You know, I was just floored. When I got the
letter, I can still remember it almost word for
word, and the gist of it was he was apologizing
because he could only pay $100 for it, and would
that be satisfactory, and that they were having
some financial trouble, so they couldn't pay
right away. I might have to wait a month or two, and
you know, God, I'd have given them the story. I'd
have paid them. to buy it, but yeah, that's when it
started. That's good. That picked up a lot there.
I'm not mistaken, the introduction to The Boy Next
Door mentions that this was the first one sold with
the actual publication. That's right. Another
story came first. That's right. After Tony
bought, actually I should say McComas and Tony
bought The Boy Next Door, I sold a story to Super
Science. And the editor, if I'm not mistaken, was a
man named Jacobson. I think it's the same guy
that's editing Galaxy now who's come back out of
whatever limbo he was in. And he brought a story
called The Land of the Lost Content, which
actually was published before The Boy Next Door,
but it was written after that. That's
interesting. It was that Jacobson. Yeah, it is.
He's done some interesting things with Galaxy.
Yeah, I'm sure he has. I've just thumbed through
it. What's he done? He's gone experimental for one
time. Meaning? The new wave, the so-called new
wave thing that you hear about, which leads
logically to the next question. Have you read much
in the recent literature, and have you got any
opinions on this new wave, quote, new wave,
unquote? Which I'm not sure what it is, frankly.
Well,
first of all, I don't read science fiction. any
kind of science fiction as much as I used to because
I just can't. I don't have the time. It doesn't
bleed me. It's not that I've lost interest. It's
just that I have so little time to read that I have to
be fairly selective and therefore I don't feel
that I'm as familiar with it as I ought to be to make
some kind of halfway sane comment and I certainly
don't want to run down any writer that I really have
not read. On the other hand, I don't want to just
dodge the question either. Yeah, I've read some of
it that I think could be classified as New Wave,
Harlan Ellison, Spinrad, Delaney,
who else? There's somebody else that pops in that I
recall reading, well I guess
Zalazny is sometimes classified in a new way. I
don't know exactly what to say about it. I was
amazed when I talked to Harlan Ellison when he came
down and asked me for this story, but he more or less
considered me part of the new way in the sense that a
lot of the stuff that I was writing at the time that I
wrote it was very non-traditional, including
Shadows in the Sun, for example.
I guess the The most honest thing I could say about
it is that I've read some of it that I admire very
much. I think Bug Jack Baron, for example, is a damn
interesting book. And I understand what it is that
they're trying to do. The problem, from my point of
view, is that it's just not on my wavelength. quite
know how else to put it. I don't resent it. I think
it's a healthy trend as long as it doesn't crowd out
every other type of writing. I think you could be
corny and say that Mr. Gernsback's mansion has
many rooms, and I can't see why one or two of them
couldn't be new with, for want of a better term. You
can't be static. You can't stand still. And I don't
care how traditionalist you may think you are, you
know, none of us wants to go back and write like Ray
Cummings or Otis Adelbert Klein or somebody, or
even Edgar Rice Burroughs, for that matter. And
it's really just a question of what direction are
you going to move, and how much of what's been built
up are you going to throw away? I don't know if this
makes any sense or not, but see, I come from the
school, in broader terms, I think literature took
a wrong turning with James Joyce. And my, not that I
don't admire Ulysses, I think it's a fascinating
book, but I think it did more harm than good in the
long run. And my own preferences, I like novelists
like Joseph Conrad, I like the early Hemingway,
things like The Sun Also Rises, and short stories
like The Two-Hearted River, and things like that,
partly because I'm a trout fishing nut, and you can
see this book on the fly is that your microphone is
sitting there. And Steinbeck, despite all the
criticism that's been leveled, I like a more
traditionally based novel. And I am, I fear,
reactionary enough to still like stories with a
beginning, a middle, and an end. I don't know. I
remember I took an English course years ago in
which the textbook was something called
Tradition and Direction in the Modern Short
Story. And they began with four short stories,
traditional stories, as examples of what not to
do. And I recall I liked all four of them better than
anything else in the book.
But I would emphasize that I don't think it's a
horrible development or anything of that kind.
It's quite obviously tied up with lots of broader
changes in this culture and in writing in general.
And it's small wonder that so many of the younger
writers are moving in that direction. I think
there's going to be a swing back the other way,
eventually. And I still, you know, given my
druthers, I'd rather read Paul Anderson, but just
the same, I like what they're doing.
First book, Mists of Dawn. Were you contacted
about this topic or did you orient it toward the
youth market yourself? No, uh, Mists of Dawn was
written, uh,
shortly after I signed with my first agent, who was
Scott Meredith, and Meredith had this contract
with the Winston Company for a series of
teenage-oriented, juvenile, whatever you want
to call them, science fiction novels, and he asked
me to write one, and asked me to write him an outline
and a sample chapter, which I did, and that's how
that thing was written. the reviewers tended to
criticize Mr. Dunn because of your
characterization of the Neon development more
than anything else. They did. That I don't
remember. It was interesting, given your
anthropology, interesting background as to why
you might have picked out this particular
characterization. To be honest, I don't
remember. It was a long time ago, and I don't
remember whether the specific topic was assigned
to me or whether I picked it. I don't know. And I
don't remember what the criticism was. It got some
good reviews. It got good reviews. In fact, the
only negative point, generally, was this thing
that Neanderthal wasn't... There was no proof
that he was the nasty old ogre that was in this
picture. Well, that's a fair criticism. You can
respond to it. by saying that there wasn't any
proof that he wasn't either. Yeah, that's true.
And who knows? But, you know, it's really not a
factual error. Not that I think factual errors are
all that important. It's a matter of case
interpretation, and I think it's very definitely
tied in with a number of other currents No, there
aren't any fashionable villains anymore. You
can't make an Indian a villain, you can't do this,
you can't do that, and I guess you can't make a
Neanderthal a villain either. And I don't know,
maybe all of those are too harsh. It's probably a
fair criticism. There's also been a lot of
discussion to the effect that the conflict, if
there was one, between the Homo sapiens and the
Neanderthals, and you see at the time I wrote this
book, they were considered to be rather more
different than they are now. That's probably what
I'm going to say in your defense. Yeah, they're
both placed in genus Homo now, you know, with just
separate species, presumably. Prior to that,
though, they were regarded as quite distinct. And
generally, the change has been that in the old
days, there was this feeling there was kind of a
knock-down, drag-out fight between the sapiens
and the Neanderthals. And apparently it probably
wasn't that way. It was more a matter of occupying
the same ecological niche and one being more
efficient than the other. But you go back and read
Missing Dawn, which I confess I have not done in a
number of years, but I did only recall including
some rather sympathetic passages about the
Neanderthals too, including one that had
something to do with a Neanderthal child. And
you've got to remember that the protagonist, the
Missadon, is a young kid who suddenly finds
himself back there, and chances are if Joe
Neanderthal came walking through the door now, we
would regard him with at least some trepidation.
Yes. But it's a fair criticism. I wouldn't object
to that. It's not nearly as annoying as some of the
criticisms I've received, my favorite being from
Kingsley Amos. who criticized Shadows in the Sun,
a great one, because he said, in effect, he thought
it was a good book and all this, but the protagonist
was utterly unbelievable, a six-foot-three
anthropologist who lived in Texas. I was guilty,
as authors often are, of writing about myself, and
I submit that I'm lots of things, but I'm not
unbelievable. That's curious. Yeah. Dick had
mentioned several things that appeared possibly
autobiographical in that book. What, in Shadows
in the Sun? In the characters. I don't know how much
of the character actually is autobiographical,
except for the... You know, if you happen to be a big
man, it's easier to write about a big man, because
that's what you've been all your life. And, you
know, he smokes pipe and things of this kind,
but... I guess there are other incidents in there
that are autobiographical, too. I don't even
remember at this point. This gets into the area of
reading into a book many things that often weren't
put there by the author, at least on a conscious
level, which is one thing I wanted to try to avoid
doing if I could. I don't have the talent for it.
Well, you never know. We talked about The Boy Next
Door. I don't know if you remember the story that
clearly or not. in effect, you know, it's modeled
on an experience that I had as a child, where they
had a radio program in Cincinnati, where every so
often, if you accumulated enough coupons or
whatever it was, you'd go down there and be
interviewed on the air, and I was so turned off by
all these saccharine interviews, you know, what
have you been doing all week, Jimmy? Yeah, I've
been playing with my dog, and this, that, you know,
You know, I thought it would be fun to get a
character who came in and really said something
like, why all that? I've been killing people. But
anyway, the character was named Jimmy Walls, and
Jim Walls is my oldest friend. He and I went through
high school together, and he still lives here in
Austin. He runs a pier out here, I don't know if
you're familiar with it, out on the lake. And his
mother got a hold of that story. And she
interpreted this to mean, you know, that I was
really, literally saying that Jimmy Walls went
out and killed people, and she went around to all
the newsstands and bought copies and burned them
and things of this kind, and just took it all dead
seriously. And so have a number of critics, by the
way, talking about the profound point I was trying
to make about the nature of this society and all
that. I mean, I was just having fun. Well, excuse
me. I got the tone you were speaking of when I read
the story. much as watching the good old Uncle Jay
show and waiting for the kids to come up and just lay
one on them.
There's probably more that is autobiographical
in Shadows in the Sun than in anything else. After
all, it's about Crystal City, and I was there. It's
a geographical location. What, did I move it? Oh,
yes. 180 degrees the opposite direction. I didn't
remember. You put it out. to the west where you look
at a map and there's nothing. Not even a highway.
That was clever. I did the same thing in the shores
of another city. Actually, I located it
correctly, but I changed place names around so
that if you actually went to whatever I called it in
the book, you wouldn't find it there. Mittaboni, I
think I said it was in, and Mittaboni's cleaning
the other end of Ucumban. And I just did it, too. I
don't know why I did it. No, not really. I guess it's
a device that's intended to indicate, look, this
is based on a real place, but I don't really mean
that when there are changes. Yeah. It's not
literal. Yeah. There weren't any aliens in
Crystal City. Except me, darn. I was the alien
Yankee. Hal and I have commented a couple of times
on the odds of any other pair of cities such as
Carrizo Springs and Crystal City producing two
Doctores of Anthropology? Well, you talk about a
fantastic coincidence department, you can
extend it, but that the two of us would both be at the
Biboonery and keep the odds. That's true. both
having taken the same, or taking degrees at UT.
Just a whole chain. Except the Claude went to
Berkeley, and I went to UC Berkeley. Ended up in the
same stadium. It's highly unlikely, to put it in
that way. Curiosity, which of your, maybe you've
already answered this in print, pilgrimage is
apparently one of your favorite stories from what
you said in Butcher and Boucher. It's Boucher, or
at least that's what he called it. Oh, okay,
Boucher. Well, that's good to know. Not his real
name, you know. But I like to pronounce things
correctly when I can. Well, I guess if you
pronounce it correctly, it'd be Boucher. Excuse
me. Someone butchers your first name terribly
over at A&M, and I was trying to remember what they
called you. My
first letter that came out in print was before I had
this typewriter that was handwritten and nobody
remarked on it.